Accessibility design doc (#195)
servo/book: src/design-documentation/accessibility/webview-internals.md

> # WebView accessibility internals

Author: webview-internals.md done 13 july

> As described in the [Servo accessibility for embedders](#servo-accessibility-for-embedders) section, the Servo accessibility system is exposed to embedders on a per-`WebView` basis.

Author: ```suggestion
As described in the [Servo accessibility for embedders](for-embedders.md) section, the Servo accessibility system is exposed to embedders on a per-`WebView` basis.
```

Reviewer: Done.

The `WebView` has a [minimal tree](#webview-subtree) of its own, which essentially exists to provide a [graft node](#subtrees) for its top-level [`Pipeline`](https://doc.servo.org/servo_constellation/pipeline/struct.Pipeline.html)'s accessibility tree.

The tree for the pipeline is generated based on its document's structure by [layout::AccessibilityTree](https://doc.servo.org/layout/accessibility_tree/struct.AccessibilityTree.html).
This tree is created when accessibility is activated for the pipeline, and updated each time the document is reflowed.
Any changes to the tree are captured in a `TreeUpdate`, which is sent to the embedder.

> [!NOTE]
> We currently don't support accessibility trees in IFrames.

## WebView subtree

Each WebView has a minimal tree consisting of a [`ScrollView`](https://docs.rs/accesskit/0.24.0/accesskit/enum.Role.html#variant.ScrollView) and a graft node for the top-level pipeline (i.e. the top-level document).

> A `TreeUpdate` with an updated graft node is emitted when accessibility is enabled for the WebView, and when the top-level pipeline (i.e. the top-level Document) changes.

Author: - enabled is now activated
- “changes” is ambiguous (see also comment in for-embedders.md)

```suggestion
A `TreeUpdate` with an updated graft node is emitted when accessibility is [activated](https://doc.servo.org/servo/struct.WebView.html#method.set_accessibility_active) for the WebView, and when the WebView navigates to another top-level pipeline (i.e. top-level Document).
```

Reviewer: Fixed "enabled"; reworded the last sentence a bit differently.

![Diagram showing subtree grafting between the minimal tree for a WebView, containing just a ScrollView node and graft node, and the tree for a pipeline for a document named webpage.html](../../images/servo-accessibility-webview-pipeline.svg)

## Accessibility activation

When an embedder calls `set_accessibility_active(true)` on a `WebView`, the `WebView` assumes responsibility for ensuring that until accessibility is deactivated or the `WebView` is destroyed, the embedder will receive `TreeUpdate`s representing the `WebView` and its current contents at any given time.

> In order to do this, it needs to activate accessibility in its top-level [`Pipeline`](https://doc.servo.org/servo_constellation/pipeline/struct.Pipeline.html) both immediately, and whenever the top-level `Pipeline` changes.

Author: “changes” is ambiguous (see above)

```suggestion
In order to do this, it needs to activate accessibility in its top-level [`Pipeline`](https://doc.servo.org/servo_constellation/pipeline/struct.Pipeline.html) both immediately, and whenever the top-level `Pipeline` navigates.
```

Reviewer: I've left this as-is; I think explaining the link between navigation and the top-level pipeline changing above makes this more comprehensible. What do you think?

Author: looks good!

> It also de-activates accessibility in any inactive pipelines.

Author: does the reader know what an “inactive pipeline” is?

Reviewer: Added an explanation.

3. The constellation sends a [`ScriptThreadMessage::SetAccessibilityActive()`](https://doc.servo.org/script_traits/enum.ScriptThreadMessage.html#variant.SetAccessibilityActive) message to notify the script thread that accessibility should be activated for the specified pipeline.
4. The script thread calls [`set_accessibility_active()`](https://doc.servo.org/layout_api/trait.Layout.html#tymethod.set_accessibility_active) on the pipeline's [`LayoutThread`](https://doc.servo.org/layout/layout_impl/struct.LayoutThread.html).
5. On the next reflow, the `LayoutThread` generates an initial `TreeUpdate` for its accessibility tree, and sends an [`EmbedderMsg::AccessibilityTreeUpdate()`](https://doc.servo.org/embedder_traits/enum.EmbedderMsg.html#variant.AccessibilityTreeUpdate) message with the tree update.
6. The `WebView` retrieves the `TreeUpdate`'s [`tree_id`](https://doc.servo.org/accesskit/struct.TreeUpdate.html#structfield.tree_id) and stores it in its [`grafted_accesskit_tree_id`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/webview/struct.WebViewInner.html#structfield.grafted_accesskit_tree_id) field.

>    It then generates a `TreeUpdate` representing its own [minimal tree](#webview-subtree) with the [graft node](http://localhost:3000/design-documentation/accessibility.html#subtrees)'s `tree_id` set to the `grafted_accesskit_tree_id`, and passes that to its `WebViewDelegate`'s [`notify_accessibility_tree_update()`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/trait.WebViewDelegate.html#method.notify_accessibility_tree_update) method.

Author: localhost link?

Reviewer: Fixed!

>    It then generates a `TreeUpdate` representing its own [minimal tree](#webview-subtree) with the [graft node](http://localhost:3000/design-documentation/accessibility.html#subtrees)'s `tree_id` set to the `grafted_accesskit_tree_id`, and passes that to its `WebViewDelegate`'s [`notify_accessibility_tree_update()`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/trait.WebViewDelegate.html#method.notify_accessibility_tree_update) method.

Author: review stopped here 8 july

>    It then generates a `TreeUpdate` representing its own [minimal tree](#webview-subtree) with the [graft node](background.md#subtrees)'s `tree_id` set to the `grafted_accesskit_tree_id`, and passes that to its `WebViewDelegate`'s [`notify_accessibility_tree_update()`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/trait.WebViewDelegate.html#method.notify_accessibility_tree_update) method.

Author: ```suggestion
   It then generates a `TreeUpdate` representing its own [minimal tree](#webview-subtree) with the [graft node](background.md#subtrees)'s `tree_id` set to the `grafted_accesskit_tree_id`, and passes this `TreeUpdate` to its `WebViewDelegate`'s [`notify_accessibility_tree_update()`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/trait.WebViewDelegate.html#method.notify_accessibility_tree_update) method.
```

Reviewer: Done.

> 7. Once the graft node has been updated, the `WebView` can then call `notify_accessibility_tree_update()` again to forward the `TreeUpdate` from the pipeline.

Author: ```suggestion
7. Once the graft node has been updated, the `WebView` can then call `notify_accessibility_tree_update()` again to forward the web contents `TreeUpdate` built in step 5.
```

Reviewer: Done (and added an admonition calling out the importance of sending the update with the graft node first).

After accessibility has been activated on the pipeline, it will continue to send `TreeUpdate`s to the `WebView`.
After the first, there's no need to send a separate `TreeUpdate` for the `WebView`'s tree; the `TreeUpdate`s from the pipeline can be passed directly to [`notify_accessibility_tree_update()`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/trait.WebViewDelegate.html#method.notify_accessibility_tree_update).

### Handling navigations: grafted tree epoch

> When there is a navigation, such as when a user enters a new URL in the address bar, clicks a link, or uses the back or forwards buttons, the `WebView`'s top-level pipeline changes.

Author: ```suggestion
When there is a navigation, such as when a user enters a new URL in the address bar, clicks a link, or uses the Back or Forward buttons, the `WebView`'s top-level pipeline changes.
```

Reviewer: Done.

Author: nit: Forward (singular)

Reviewer: Done.

This means that it needs to:

- de-activate accessibility in the old top-level pipeline,
- activate accessibility in the new top-level pipeline,
- graft the tree for the new pipeline in place of the tree for the old pipeline,
- begin forwarding the tree updates from the new pipeline, and
- **ignore** any further tree updates from the old pipeline.

We manage this by tracking an [Epoch](https://doc.servo.org/servo_base/struct.Epoch.html) which is incremented every time the top-level pipeline changes.
This epoch is passed from the Constellation, where the top-level pipeline is set, to [`ScriptThreadMessage::SetAccessibilityActive()`](https://doc.servo.org/script_traits/enum.ScriptThreadMessage.html#variant.SetAccessibilityActive) along with the `PipelineId`.

> It's then sent back to the `WebView` in [`EmbedderMsg::AccessibilityTreeUpdate()`](https://doc.servo.org/embedder_traits/enum.EmbedderMsg.html#variant.AccessibilityTreeUpdate), and checked against its existing [`grafted_accesskit_tree_epoch`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/webview/struct.WebViewInner.html#structfield.grafted_accesskit_tree_epoch).

Author: ```suggestion
It's then sent back to the `WebView` in [`EmbedderMsg::AccessibilityTreeUpdate()`](https://doc.servo.org/embedder_traits/enum.EmbedderMsg.html#variant.AccessibilityTreeUpdate), so that the `WebView` can check this against its existing [`grafted_accesskit_tree_epoch`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/webview/struct.WebViewInner.html#structfield.grafted_accesskit_tree_epoch).
```

Reviewer: Done.

- If the epoch hasn't changed, the `TreeUpdate` can simply be forwarded to the embedder.
- If the epoch is greater than the existing [`grafted_accesskit_tree_epoch`](https://doc.servo.org/servo/webview/struct.WebViewInner.html#structfield.grafted_accesskit_tree_epoch), that indicates that a new tree needs to be grafted, and the epoch value needs to be updated.
- If the epoch is _less_ than the existing `grafted_accesskit_tree_epoch`, the `TreeUpdate` should be ignored.
  > [!IMPORTANT]
  > If the `TreeUpdate` with a stale epoch was forwarded to the embedder, it could cause a panic, as it would contain a `TreeId` which is no longer grafted in the `WebView`'s tree.

![Diagram showing activating accessibility and navigating to a new URL, illustrating the previous two sections.](../../images/accessibility-activation.svg)

> [!NOTE]

> > Deactivating accessibility in inactive pipelines means we destroy all of the cached accessibility tree information for that pipeline.

Author: consider clarifying the distinction between platform accessibility tree and cached accessibility tree information (in layout)? for example,

```suggestion
> Only the current document needs to be in the platform accessibility tree, so we remove the old document’s contents from the tree until the user navigates back to it (if at all).
> But deactivating accessibility in inactive pipelines also means we destroy the accessibility tree information cached in layout for that pipeline.
```

Reviewer: I reworded this a bit, what do you think?

Author: looks great!

> > This means that even if the user navigates in the [session history](https://doc.servo.org/servo_constellation/session_history/index.html), we will always need to re-compute all accessibility data whenever a navigation occurs.

Author: link to issue

Reviewer: Done.

## Deterministic `TreeId` generation for `Pipeline`s

<!--
[#43012](https://github.com/servo/servo/pull/43012)

> -->

Author: include this citation? notably this decision has tradeoffs that are only discussed in the PR description, which i think is ok, but we should at least make that easy to find

Reviewer: Done, and a few other citations sprinkled around.

I moved the rest of the patch analysis into a "todo.md" to avoid it showing up in the rendered docs.

Author: thanks!
